Pathological narcissism is the result of
a tragic disparity between a child's
emotional needs and what their early
care environment was able to provide.
For decades, the literature has pointed
again and again to a combination of
emotional neglect and subtle or overt
pressure that's placed on the child to
gratify a caregiver's own narcissistic
strivings. I call this a narcissogenic
environment, and it's something I've
encountered countless times in my own
work as a narcissism specialist. A
narcissogenic environment is one where
the child's core emotional needs for
empathic mirroring are not being met.
Simultaneously, the child is pushed to
fulfill a caregiver's emotional needs by
embodying the parents expectations. In
response, the child unconsciously
constructs a false self that appears to
be exactly what the caregiver wants.